23mar16abu
(c) Software Lab. Alexander Burger


         64-bit PicoLisp
         ===============

The 64-bit version of PicoLisp is a complete rewrite of the 32-bit version.

While the 32-bit version was written in C, the 64-bit version is implemented in
a generic assembler, which in turn is written in PicoLisp. In most respects, the
two versions are compatible (see "Differences" below).


      Building the Kernel
      -------------------

No C-compiler is needed to build the interpreter kernel, only a 64-bit version
of the GNU assembler for the target architecture.

The kernel sources are the "*.l" files in the "src64/" directory. The PicoLisp
assembler parses them and generates a few "*.s" files, which the GNU assembler
accepts to build the executable binary file. See the details for bootstrapping
the "*.s" files in INSTALL.

The generic assembler is in "src64/lib/asm.l". It is driven by the script
"src64/mkAsm" which is called by "src64/Makefile".

The CPU registers and instruction set of the PicoLisp processor are described in
"doc64/asm", and the internal data structures of the PicoLisp machine in
"doc64/structures".

Currently, arm64/Linux, x86-64/Linux, ppc64/Linux, x86-64/FreeBSD,
x86-64/OpenBSD and x86-64/SunOS are supported. The platform dependent files are
in the "src64/arch/" for the target architecture, and in "src64/sys/" for the
target operating system.

In addition, an emulator which "assembles" to C code can be built. It is much
slower than the native code, but otherwise completely compatible.


      Reasons for the Use of Assembly Language
      ----------------------------------------

Contrary to the common expectation: Runtime execution speed was not a primary
design decision factor. In general, pure code efficiency has not much influence
on the overall execution speed of an application program, as memory bandwidth
(and later I/O bandwidth) is the main bottleneck.

The reasons to choose assembly language (instead of C) were, in decreasing order
of importance:

   1. Stack manipulations
      Alignment to cell boundaries: To be able to directly express the desired
      stack data structures (see "doc64/structures", e.g. "Apply frame"), a
      better control over the stack (as compared to C) was required.

      Indefinite pushs and pops: A Lisp interpreter operates on list structures
      of unknown length all the time. The C version always required two passes,
      the first to determine the length of the list to allocate the necessary
      stack structures, and then the second to do the actual work. An assembly
      version can simply push as many items as are encountered, and clean up the
      stack with pop's and stack pointer arithmetics.

   2. Alignments and memory layout control
      Similar to the stack structures, there are also heap data structures that
      can be directly expressed in assembly declarations (built at assembly
      time), while a C implementation has to defer that to runtime.

      Built-in functions (SUBRs) need to be aligned to to a multiple of 16+2,
      reflecting the data type tag requirements, and thus allow direct jumps to
      the SUBR code without further pointer arithmetic and masking, as is
      necessary in the C version.

   3. Multi-precision arithmetics (Carry-Flag)
      The bignum functions demand an extensive use of CPU flags. Overflow and
      carry/borrow have to emulated in C with awkward comparisons of signed
      numbers.

   4. Register allocation
      A manual assembly implementation can probably handle register allocation
      more flexibly, with minimal context saves and reduced stack space, and
      multiple values can be returned from functions in registers. As mentioned
      above, this has no measurable effect on execution speed, but the binary's
      overall size is significantly reduced.

   5. Return status register flags from functions
      Functions can return condition codes directly. The callee does not need to
      re-check returned values. Again, this has only a negligible impact on
      performance.

   6. Multiple function entry points
      Some things can be handled more flexibly, and existing code may be easier
      to re-use. This is on the same level as wild jumps within functions
      ('goto's), but acceptable in the context of an often-used but rarely
      modified program like a Lisp kernel.

It would indeed be feasible to write only certain parts of the system in
assembly, and the rest in C. But this would be rather unsatisfactory. And it
gives a nice feeling to be independent of a heavy-weight C compiler.


      Differences to the 32-bit Version
      ---------------------------------

Except for the following seven cases, the 64-bit version should be upward
compatible to the 32-bit version.

1. Internal format and printed representation of external symbols
   This is probably the most significant change. External (i.e. database)
   symbols are coded more efficiently internally (occupying only a single cell),
   and have a slightly different printed representation. Existing databases need
   to be converted.

2. Short numbers are pointer-equal
   As there is now an internal "short number" type, an expression like

      (== 64 64)

   will evaluate to 'T' on a 64-bit system, but to 'NIL' on a 32-bit system.

3. Bit manipulation functions may differ for negative arguments
   Numbers are represented internally in a different format. Bit manipulations
   are not really defined for negative numbers, but (& -15 -6) will give -6 on
   32 bits, and 6 on 64 bits.

4. 'do' takes only a 'cnt' argument (not a bignum)
   For the sake of simplicity, a short number (60 bits) is considered to be
   enough for counted loops.

5. Calling native functions is different. Direct calls using the 'lib:fun'
   notation is still possible (see the 'ext' and 'ht' libraries), but the
   corresponding functions must of course be coded in assembly and not in C. To
   call C functions, the new 'native' function should be used, which can
   interface to native C functions directly, without the need of glue code to
   convert arguments and return values.

6. New features were added, like coroutines or namespaces.

7. Bugs (in the implementation, or in this list ;-)
